# milia

Milia is a multi-tenanting gem for hosted Rails 3.1 applications which use
devise for user authentication.

## Basic concepts

* should be transparent to the main application code
* should be symbiotic with user authentication
* should raise exceptions upon attempted illegal access
* should force tenanting (not allow sloppy access to all tenant records)
* should allow application flexibility upon new tenant sign-up, usage of eula information, etc
* should be as non-invasive (as possible) to Rails code
* row-based tenanting is used
* default_scope is used to enforce tenanting

The author used schema-based tenanting in the past but found it deficient for
the following reasons: most DBMS are optimized to handle enormous number of
rows but not an enormous number of schema (tables). Schema-based tenancy took a
performance hit, was seriously time-consuming to backup and restore, was invasive
into the Rails code structure (monkey patching), was complex to implement, and
couldn't use Rails migration tools as-is.

## Structure

* necessary models: user, tenant
* necessary migrations: user, tenant, tenants_users (join table)

## Dependency requirements

* Rails 3.1 or higher
* Devise 1.4.8 or higher

## Installation

Either install the gem manually:

  gem install milia

Or in the Gemfile:

  gem 'milia'
  
## Getting started

### Rails setup

Milia expects a user session, so please set one up

  $ rails g session_migration
      invoke  active_record
      create    db/migrate/20111012060818_add_sessions_table.rb
  
### Devise setup

* See https://github.com/plataformatec/devise for how to set up devise.
* The current version of milia requires that devise use a *User* model.

### Milia setup

#### migrations

*ALL* models require a tenanting field, whether they are to be universal or to
be tenanted. So make sure the following is added to each migration

<i>db/migrate</i>

  t.references :tenant

Tenanted models will also require indexes for the tenant field:

  add_index :TABLE, :tenant_id

Also create a tenants_users join table:

<i>db/migrate/20111008081639_create_tenants_users.rb</i>

  class CreateTenantsUsers < ActiveRecord::Migration
    def change
      create_table :tenants_users, :id => false  do |t|
        t.references   :tenant
        t.references   :user
      end
      add_index :tenants_users, :tenant_id
      add_index :tenants_users, :user_id
    end
  end

#### application controller

add the following line AFTER the devise-required filter for authentications:

<i>app/controllers/application_controller.rb</i>

  before_filter :authenticate_user!   # forces devise to authenticate user
  before_filter :set_current_tenant   # forces milia to set up current tenant

catch any exceptions with the following (be sure to also add the designated methods!)

  rescue_from ::Milia::Control::MaxTenantExceeded, :with => :max_tenants
  rescue_from ::Milia::Control::InvalidTenantAccess, :with => :invalid_tenant

#### routes

Add the following line into the devise_for :users block

<i>config/routes.rb</i>

  devise_for :users do
    post  "users" => "milia/registrations#create"
  end
  
### Designate which model determines account

Add the following acts_as_... to designate which model will be used as the key
into tenants_users to find the tenant for a given user. 
Only designate one model in this manner.

<i>app/models/user.rb</i>

  class User < ActiveRecord::Base
    
    acts_as_universal_and_determines_account
  
  end  # class User

### Designate which model determines tenant

Add the following acts_as_... to designate which model will be used as the
tenant model. It is this id field which designates the tenant for an entire 
group of users which exist within a single tenanted domain.
Only designate one model in this manner.

<i>app/models/tenant.rb</i>

  class Tenant < ActiveRecord::Base
    
    acts_as_universal_and_determines_tenant
    
  end  # class Tenant

### Designate universal models

Add the following acts_as_universal to *ALL* models which are to be universal and
remove any superfluous
  
  belongs_to  :tenant
  
which the generator might have generated ( acts_as_tenant will specify that ).

<i>app/models/eula.rb</i>

  class Eula < ActiveRecord::Base
    
    acts_as_universal
  
  end  # class Eula

### Designate tenanted models

Add the following acts_as_tenant to *ALL* models which are to be tenanted and
remove any superfluous
  
  belongs_to  :tenant
  
which the generator might have generated ( acts_as_tenant will specify that ).

<i>app/models/post.rb</i>

  class Post < ActiveRecord::Base
    
    acts_as_tenant
  
  end  # class Post


### Exceptions raised

  Milia::Control::InvalidTenantAccess
  Milia::Control::MaxTenantExceeded

### Tenant pre-processing hooks

Milia expects a tenant pre-processing & setup hook:

  Tenant.create_new_tenant(params)   # see sample code below
  
where the sign-up params are passed, the new tenant must be validated, created,
and then returned. Any other kinds of prepatory processing are permitted here,
but should be minimal, and should not involve any tenanted models. At this point
in the new account sign-up chain, no tenant has been set up yet (but will be
immediately after the new tenant has been created).

<i>app/models/tenant.rb</i>

  def self.create_new_tenant(params)
    
    tenant # Tenant.new(:cname => params[:user][:email], :company => params[:tenant][:company])

    if new_signups_not_permitted?(params)
      
      raise MaxTenantExceeded, "Sorry, new accounts not permitted at this time" 
      
    else 
      tenant.save    # create the tenant
    end
    return tenant
  end

### Alternate use case: user belongs to multiple tenants

Your application might allow a user to belong to multiple tenants. You will need
to provide some type of mechanism to allow the user to choose which account
(thus tenant) they wish to access. Once chosen, in your controller, you will need
to put:

<i>app/controllers/any_controller.rb</i>
  
  set_current_tenant( new_tenant_id )


## Cautions

* Milia designates a default_scope for all models (both universal and tenanted). From Rails 3.2 onwards, the last designated default scope overrides any prior scopes.
* Milia uses Thread.current[:tenant_id] to hold the current tenant for the existing Action request in the application.
* SQL statements executed outside the context of ActiveRecord pose a potential danger; the current milia implementation does not extend to the DB connection level and so cannot enforce tenanting at this point.
* The tenant_id of a universal model will always be forced to nil.
* The tenant_id of a tenanted model will be set to the current_tenant of the current_user upon creation.


## Contributing to milia
 
* Check out the latest master to make sure the feature hasn't been implemented or the bug hasn't been fixed yet
* Check out the issue tracker to make sure someone already hasn't requested it and/or contributed it
* Fork the project
* Start a feature/bugfix branch
* Commit and push until you are happy with your contribution
* Make sure to add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a future version unintentionally.
* Please try not to mess with the Rakefile, version, or history. If you want to have your own version, or is otherwise necessary, that is fine, but please isolate to its own commit so I can cherry-pick around it.

## Copyright

Copyright (c) 2011 Daudi Amani. See LICENSE.txt for
further details.

